[ENH] Add `descriptions.tsv` file relating to the `desc-<label>` entity (#1613)
bids-standard/bids-specification: src/derivatives/common-data-types.md

All REQUIRED metadata fields coming from a derivative file’s source file(s) MUST
be propagated to the JSON description of the derivative unless the processing
makes them invalid (for example, if a source 4D image is averaged to create a single

> static volume, a `RepetitionTime` property would no longer be relevant). This creates

Reviewer: is a transition missing? Otherwise I am not sure what "this" refers to.

Author: more like a bit I wrote then removed incompletely

a trail of the computational steps performed. Because many steps can occur until clean
data and because it is NOT mandatory to save every file or step, the simpler `desc-preproc`
and `desc-proc` are available.

## descriptions.tsv

To keep a record of what has been done to the data, a `descriptions.tsv` file can be used, containing at least two columns: `desc_id` and `description`. This file can be located at the root derivatives level or at the subject level (inheritance principle).

> `desc_id` contains all labels used in the [`desc entity`](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/appendices/entities.html#desc), while `description` is a human-readable description of what was computed. Note that while it is helpful to document how files are generated, we see this as 'light provenance' (see [provenance BEP28](https://github.com/bids-standard/BEP028_BIDSprov) for full computational reproducibility).

Reviewer: Are we sure we want to reference to unmerged BEP?

Reviewer 2: I would vote against it, as BEPs are too much in flux to be included in the authoritative spec

Author: there are no BEP talking about descriptions.tsv - this is a PR for common derivatives, we propose from the meeting in June (sort of cheap prov)

Reviewer 3: The concern is with reference BEP28.

Reviewer 4: yeap, and it was addressed, all good ;)

{{ MACROS___make_filetree_example(
   {
    "raw/": {
         CHANGES
         README
         channels.tsv
         dataset_description.tsv
         participants.tsv
          "sub-001": {
            "eeg": {
                "sub-001_task-listening_events.tsv": "",
                "sub-001_task-listening_events.json": "",
                "sub-001_task-listening_eeg.edf": "",
                "sub-001_task-listening_eeg.json": "",
                },
            },
          },
  "derivatives/": {
         descriptions.tsv
        "sub-001": {
            "eeg": {
                "sub-001_task-listening_desc-filt_eeg.edf": "",
                "sub-001_task-listening_desc-filt_eeg.json": "",
                "sub-001_task-listening_desc-filt+ds_eeg.edf": "",

>                 "sub-001_task-listening_desc-filt+ds_eeg.json": "",

Reviewer: `+` is not yet allowed in entity labels, no?

Author: For now I'm happy to edit without +

All REQUIRED metadata fields coming from a derivative file’s source file(s) MUST
be propagated to the JSON description of the derivative unless the processing
makes them invalid (for example, if a source 4D image is averaged to create a single
static volume, a `RepetitionTime` property would no longer be relevant). As each file
includes what was computed by increment, a trail of the computational steps performed
is created. Because many steps can occur until the fully clean data are obtained and

> because it is NOT mandatory to save every file or step, the simpler `desc-preproc`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
because it is OPTIONAL to save every file or step, the simpler `desc-preproc`
```

and `desc-proc` are available. It becomes however important to document what such
pre-processing or processing are, and record the order of computational steps. This

> can be in the json file or alternatively described in a descriptions.tsv file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be done in the JSON sidecar files or alternatively described in a `descriptions.tsv` file.
```

## descriptions.tsv

> To keep a record of what has been done to the data, a `descriptions.tsv` file can be used, containing at least two columns: `desc_id` and `description`. This file can be located at the root derivatives level or at the subject level (inheritance principle).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To keep a record of what has been done to the data, a `descriptions.tsv` file can be used, containing at least two columns: `desc_id` and `description`. This file MAY be located at the root of the derivative dataset, or at the subject or session level ([Inheritance Principle](../common-principles.md#the-inheritance-principle))).
```

> `desc_id` contains all labels used in the [`desc entity`](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/appendices/entities.html#desc), while `description` is a human-readable description of what was computed. Note that while it is helpful to document how files are generated, we see this as 'light provenance', i.e. it is not aimed at providing full computational reproducibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`desc_id` contains all labels used in the [`desc entity`](../appendices/entities.md#desc), while `description` is a human-readable description of what was computed. Note that while it is helpful to document how files are generated, we see this as 'light provenance', i.e. it is not aimed at providing full computational reproducibility.
```

{{ MACROS___make_filetree_example(
   {
    "raw/": {
         CHANGES
         README
         channels.tsv
         dataset_description.tsv
         participants.tsv
          "sub-001": {
            "eeg": {
                "sub-001_task-listening_events.tsv": "",
                "sub-001_task-listening_events.json": "",
                "sub-001_task-listening_eeg.edf": "",
                "sub-001_task-listening_eeg.json": "",
                },
            },
          },
  "derivatives/": {
         descriptions.tsv
        "sub-001": {
            "eeg": {
                "sub-001_task-listening_desc-Filt_eeg.edf": "",
                "sub-001_task-listening_desc-Filt_eeg.json": "",
                "sub-001_task-listening_desc-FiltDs_eeg.edf": "",
                "sub-001_task-listening_desc-FiltDs_eeg.json": "",
                "sub-001_task-listening_desc-preproc_eeg.edf": "",
                "sub-001_task-listening_desc-preproc_eeg.json": "",                },
            },
        }
   }
) }}

`descriptions.tsv`

> | desc_id          | description                                                                                               |
> |------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
> | Filt             | low-pass filtered at 30Hz                                                                                |
> | FiltDs           | low-pass filtered at 30Hz,downsampled to 250Hz                                                            |
> | preproc          | low-pass filtered at 30Hz, downsampled to 250Hz and rereferenced to a common average reference |
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| desc_id          | description                                                                                    |
|------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Filt             | low-pass filtered at 30Hz                                                                      |
| FiltDs           | low-pass filtered at 30Hz,downsampled to 250Hz                                                 |
| preproc          | low-pass filtered at 30Hz, downsampled to 250Hz and rereferenced to a common average reference |
```

> | desc_id          | description                                                                                               |
> |------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
> | Filt             |  low-pass filtered at 30Hz                                                                                |
> | FiltDs           | low-pass filtered at 30Hz,downsampled to 250Hz                                                            |
> | preproc          | low-pass filtered at 30Hz, downsampled to 250Hz and rereferenced to a common average reference            |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| desc_id          | description                                                                                               |
|------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Filt             | low-pass filtered at 30Hz                                                                                |
| FiltDs           | low-pass filtered at 30Hz,downsampled to 250Hz                                                            |
| preproc          | low-pass filtered at 30Hz, downsampled to 250Hz and rereferenced to a common average reference |
```

makes them invalid (for example, if a source 4D image is averaged to create a single
static volume, a `RepetitionTime` property would no longer be relevant).

## descriptions.tsv

To keep a record of processing steps applied to the data, a `descriptions.tsv` file MAY be used.
The `descriptions.tsv` file MUST contain at least the following two columns:

-   `label`
-   `description`

This file MAY be located at the root of the derivative dataset,
or at the subject or session level
([Inheritance Principle](../common-principles.md#the-inheritance-principle)).

The `label` column contains the labels used with the [`desc entity`](../appendices/entities.md#desc),
within the particular nesting that the `description.tsv` file is placed.
For example, if the `descriptions.tsv` file is placed at the root of the derivative dataset,
its `label` column SHOULD contain all labels of the [`desc entity`](../appendices/entities.md#desc)
used across the entire derivative dataset.

The `description` column contains human-readable descriptions of the processing steps.

> The use of `description.tsv` files together with the [`desc entity`](../appendices/entities.md#desc)

Reviewer 5: it should be plural `descriptions.tsv`

Reviewer 2: fixed in https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/1613/commits/5ab8b1e34862f8a2fc9e8cc4ac5ae754c8b11e53
